[mkdocs] docs: add nodes concept (#864)
NemProject/nem: mkdocs/pages/en/textbook/nodes.md

# Nodes

Node
:   A computer running the NEM software which shares information with other nodes, validates incoming <transactions:>,
    and participates in <consensus:> and block creation.

Nodes form the backbone of the blockchain, ensuring the network remains functional as long as enough nodes are active.

Anyone can run a NEM node.
Operators do so to <harvesting:|harvest> blocks with their own account, to host <delegated harvesting:> for others,
or to qualify for the <Supernode Program:>.

## Node Structure

Every NEM node runs the same application, called _NIS_.

NIS
:   NEM Infrastructure Server. A single Java process that implements everything a NEM node does.

NIS has four parts: an [engine](#engine) that does the blockchain work, a [REST API](#rest-api) and a
[WebSocket](#websocket) service that expose it, and an embedded [database](#database) that stores its data.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a paragraph explaining also what are the external components. "Other nodes" is easy to understand, but we need to explain that "clients" are blockchain applications like wallets and explorers.
It's explained later, but it's too late. Move that here.

```dot
digraph NemNode {
    compound=true;
    splines=ortho;
    nodesep=0.7;
    ranksep=0.7;
    node [shape=box];
    edge [penwidth=1.5 dir=both];

    // External actors
    OtherNodes [label="Other nodes" shape=plaintext];
    Clients    [label="Clients" shape=plaintext];

    subgraph cluster_nis {
        label="NIS";
        labelloc=b;
        labeljust=c;
        style=dashed;
        penwidth=1.5;
        margin=25;

        // Core components
        REST   [label="REST + WebSocket" style=filled fixedsize=true width=6.0 height=0.8 URL="#rest-api"];
        Engine [label="Engine" style=filled width=2.6 height=0.9 URL="#engine"];
        H2     [label="State + Blocks\n(H2)" style=filled width=2.6 height=0.9 shape=cylinder URL="#database"];

        { rank=same; Engine; H2; }

        // Internal connections
        REST -> Engine;
        REST -> H2 [style=invis];
        Engine -> H2;
    }

    // External connections
    OtherNodes -> REST;
    Clients -> REST;
}
```

> ### Engine

Author: I used "engine" in the docs to make it easier to understand, but it is not an identifier used in the NEM codebase. It is to differenciate the actual business logic and remaining internal machinery (consensus, harvesting, P2P, unconfirmed pool) from the REST, websockets, and database layers.

Reviewer: Looks good to me.

The engine runs <consensus:>, <harvesting:>, [peer-to-peer networking](#peer-to-peer-communication), and the
<unconfirmed pool:|unconfirmed transactions pool>.
It does the blockchain work: validating incoming data, producing blocks, and keeping the node in sync with its peers.

> The engine is not reachable from outside.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The engine is not reachable from outside the node.
```

Every inbound request, from another node or from a client, arrives through the HTTP layer described below and is then
handed to the engine.

### REST API

NIS exposes a single HTTP API.
It serves two kinds of callers: other nodes, which use it for the peer-to-peer protocol, and clients such as wallets,
explorers, and applications.

Peer requests cover block synchronization, transaction relay, and node discovery.

> Client requests read blockchain data and submit new <transactions:>, which NIS validates, adds to the local pool,

Reviewer: The part about "which NIS validates" belongs to the engine, no? I would remove it from here.
Also, I would add "for example", because I imagine clients can do more things than read data and submit transactions.

and propagates to its peers.

### WebSocket

> NIS publishes block and transaction events through a built-in WebSocket service.

Reviewer: Maybe add link to [Wikipedia WebSockets page](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API).
I'll add it to Symbol too.

Subscribed applications receive notifications in real time without polling.

### Database

NIS persists both blocks and the current blockchain state in an embedded [H2](https://www.h2database.com) relational

> database, managed through Hibernate.

Reviewer: * I'd appreciate links to Hibernate and Flyway because I have to idea what they are :D
* I also don't know what "embedded" means in this context.
* I was under the impression the state of the blockchain is not persisted on disk, so every time you restart a NIS node it needs to process all blocks from Nemesis to rebuild the state. If this is correct, it definitely needs to be explained.
* What is a "schema migration"?
* What database files live in the data directory? The blocks?

Note that reputation scores are local: each node maintains its own view of the network,
based solely on its direct experience.

The implementation is based on the [EigenTrust++](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EigenTrust) algorithm.

!!! note "Node rotation"

    To prevent the formation of isolated or stagnant node groups,
    NEM nodes periodically refresh their peer set, pulling peer lists from a sample of current peers
    and merging newly discovered nodes into the candidate pool, regardless of how well existing peers are scoring.

    This forced churn ensures that nodes continually discover and evaluate new peers,
    maintaining a well-connected and adaptive network topology.

    By balancing reputation-based stability with deliberate connection turnover,
    the protocol avoids network fragmentation and promotes long-term decentralization.

Finally, note that this reputation score is an internal metric used by nodes to decide which other nodes to connect to.
When using <delegated harvesting:>, accounts may delegate to any node they choose, based on reputation factors
that may or may not be related to the score described in this page.

> ## Supernodes

Author: Moved supernodes explanation here

A supernode is a node enrolled in the _Supernode Program_.

Supernode Program
:   An off-chain, community-funded program that rewards reliable public nodes.

> NEM has no block subsidy or inflation, so transaction fees alone are typically modest.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit weird. Transaction fees being modest is unrelated to the absence of inflation or subsidies. How about:

```suggestion
NEM has no block subsidy or inflation; nodes are paid exclusively from transaction fees,
which can be small in periods of low activity.
```

The Supernode Program offsets this by paying daily rewards to nodes that prove themselves reliable.

To qualify, a node must:

* Hold at least 10'000 <XEM:>.

> * Stay in sync with the chain and run an up-to-date client.

Reviewer: It would be nice to list the conditions exactly. How far away can the node lag behind the rest? For how long?
What is the maximum tolerable ping time? etc.
I'm sure we must have a list somewhere.

* Run on hardware and a network connection fast enough to serve the rest of the network.

Eligibility is re-tested every day across four rounds of checks spaced six hours apart,
and a node must pass every check to earn that day's reward.

Rewards come from a fixed daily pool of 25'500 XEM, and each qualifying node earns at most 500 XEM per day.
While 51 or fewer nodes qualify, each receives the full 500 XEM.
Beyond that, the pool is divided equally, so per-node rewards fall as the network grows.

> Enrollment is optional.

Reviewer: We don't want a full user guide, but at least we need to provide a contact point for more information.
I've already asked for one.
